---
layout: page
title: "Tissue Donation & Processing: Current Issues"
permalink: /Tissue-Donation
nav: true
weight: 1
toc: true
---

## Introduction

While the federal contractors charged with organ recovery are called Organ
Procurement Organizations (OPOs), most OPOs also recover tissue, cornea, skin,
bone, and other medical products of human origin. Because of well-documented
failures of regulatory accountability for OPO organ recovery performance[^1],
coupled with a financial reimbursement structure which often incentivizes OPOs
to invest more heavily in tissue recovery and processing over organs[^2], there
is a long-standing conflict of interest which has yet to be addressed and
resolved. For many OPOs, tissue recovery and processing has become their core
business, while lifesaving organ recovery has been largely deprioritized.
Additionally, the siloing of federal oversight between the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS, which oversees OPOs) and the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA, which has jurisdiction over tissue) does not allow for a
fulsome picture of conflicts of interest between OPO organ and tissue
activities, or meaningful scrutiny into the ways in which intertwined business
interests can present harm to patients.

Tissue procurement and processing is a multi-billion dollar international
industry. Tissue procurement can refer to a wide variety of materials and be
used in many different procedures, including:

- **Skin** grafts can be used in wound repair, for burn victims, or during
  cosmetic procedures.
- **Bone** can be used with minimal processing for bone grafts, or it can be
  turned into plates, screws, or putties. Bone grafts are commonly used in
  fracture repair and reconstruction after cancer. One of the most common uses
  of bone-based putty is dental implants.
- **Veins** are often used during heart surgeries, such as a bypass.
- **Connective tissue** includes tendons, ligaments, and cartilage. Tendons are
  frequently used in orthopedic surgeries, such as a knee or shoulder repair,
  while cartilage can be used in cosmetic procedures like facial surgery.
- **Birth tissue** is material from the placenta, umbilical cord, or amniotic
  fluid. Most commonly, these materials are used to create wound coverings. This
  is the only type of living tissue donation.
- **Heart Valves** are used in two main procedures: heart valve replacement
  surgery and reconstructive cardiac surgery.
- **Cornea** is the transparent, dome-shaped surface of the eye. A cornea
  transplant is most often used to restore vision to a person with a damaged
  cornea, though can also relieve pain or other symptoms associated with cornea
  diseases.

Safety and ethical issues within the tissue industry have been written about and
investigated for decades, with few changes to practice or policy produced; over
this time, the industry has only continued to grow. **Our research highlighted
numerous issues that directly affect patient care and public trust in the tissue
procurement system:**

- **[Safety in tissue processing](#safety-in-tissue-processing)**
- **[Consent in tissue donation](#consent-in-tissue-donation)**
- **[Financial incentives and conflicts of interest](#financial-incentives-and-conflicts-of-interest)**
- **[Potential inequities in care](#inequities-in-care)**

Tissue procurement, processing, and transplantation is a rapidly growing field
of medicine. The current regulatory gray areas make it all the more urgent that
these issues be addressed for the sake of patient safety and public trust in the
system.

### Differences between organ and tissue procurement 

- **Biological differences:** The difference between organs and tissues is, in
  the words of one expert we spoke to, that “organs are vascularized and have a
  ‘crude shelf life’ that limits their viability outside the body, and when
  they’re transplanted a recipient needs to be on immunosuppressants. Tissues
  are generally not vascularized.”
- **Clinical requirements:** Many more people can become tissue donors than
  organ donors because tissue donation lacks the strict clinical requirements
  that apply to organ donors.
- **Scope:** One person can donate organs for up to eight other people, while
  one tissue donation can help anywhere from 50 to 100 other people.[^3]
- **Processing:** The breadth of tissue products is reflected in the list of
  example processing actions the FDA offers, from preparation and sterilization
  to “cutting, grinding, shaping, culturing, enzymatic digestion, and
  decellularization.”[^4] One tissue processing company, MTF Biologics, lists 75
  pages of orthopedic tissue products.[^5]
- **Allocation:** Allocation decisions about where OPOs should send tissues are
  at the discretion of the OPO, because—unlike for organs—allocation is not
  prescribed by an oversight body.
- **Financial incentives:** Current OPO reimbursement structures do not provide
  meaningful financial incentive for OPOs to increase organ volume, while there
  is tremendous financial incentive to recover more tissue.[^6]
- **Legal structure:** While OPOs are technically structured as 501(c)3
  non-profits, tissue processors are often for-profit, and therefore without any
  meaningful transparency related to their financials.
- **Industry demand:** Organ transplants are often lifesaving, but tissue
  transplants can be used for lifesaving, life-enhancing, or cosmetic purposes.
  As one expert noted, **“while there are things like bone grafts, the truth is
  we as a society have used more body parts for cosmetic enhancements,”** rather
  than lifesaving procedures.

### The tissue procurement process

In the United States, tissue procurement is often handled by Organ Procurement
Organizations (OPOs), the same organizations tasked by the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS) with recovering organs. (Donor hospitals decide
which entities they will work with for tissue procurement, though most choose to
work with the local OPO for operational streamlining and political expediency.)
Tissue recovery and processing companies, as well as tissue banks, may also play
a role in the process, which varies widely between organizations and locations.
Some OPOs handle every step of the process, from tissue procurement to creating
and selling human tissue-based products; others only make referrals to tissue
banks. In a few places in the U.S., hospitals work directly with tissue recovery
organizations separate from OPOs. There are currently 128 accredited tissue
banks in the United States, including [33 OPOs](#bookmark=id.t63oajpp8s5y).[^7]

The process from tissue donation to transplant includes:

- A referral to an OPO is initiated (usually by a hospital, hospice, funeral
  home director, death investigator, coroner, or medical examiner) when staff
  have identified a patient who may be able to donate, at which point an OPO
  coordinator will make an assessment about organ and tissue donation viability.
  If the patient is ventilated, the priority evaluation should be for organ
  procurement potential. If the patient is not ventilated (the patient is
  already extubated, was never intubated, or already has a cardiac time of
  death), then the clinical evaluation is for tissue and eye procurement.
- It’s important to note that evaluation for tissue procurement is dependent on
  which tissue processors and eye banks the OPO works with. Evaluations for
  tissue procurement are not standardized. Also, OPOs may collect the same types
  of tissue for multiple processors with different criteria.
- If a tissue donation is possible, the OPO will approach the patient’s family
  or next of kin for consent. If the patient has organ **and** tissue
  procurement potential, most OPOs approach the family at the patient’s bedside
  (in person).
- If the patient has only tissue and eye procurement potential, the conversation
  with their family is often done over the phone (usually on a recorded line).
- If the family consents to tissue donation, a procurement team from the OPO or
  tissue bank will surgically recover tissues. Staff often rely on on-the-job
  training, rather than formal medical training; tissue procurement can be done
  by any staff the OPO deems qualified.
- The OPO either sells the donated tissue to a separate tissue processor, or
  handles processing itself.
- Tissue processors, whether an OPO or a separate business, then sell tissue
  products directly to hospitals and clinicians. Skin and bone grafts are often
  priced by size, while highly processed products vary in price. Researchers
  have estimated that human tissue has been priced at up to $500 per gram.[^8]
  The tissue procurement process can be managed by a single organization, or can
  involve both a nonprofit OPO and a for-profit tissue processor. For example,
  MTF Biologics, one of the largest tissue companies, receives referrals from 27
  different OPOs.[^9]

## Regulation and the role of lobbying

### Federal oversight

Tissue procurement and processing is primarily overseen by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), rather than CMS, which regulates organ procurement and
transplants.

(Note: the Health Resources Services Administration (HRSA) oversees the contract
for the organ procurement transplantation network (OPTN), a contractor tasked
with managing the national organ donation/procurement system. Learn more about
issues of
[oversight gaps and conflicts](https://bloomworks.digital/organdonationreform/Oversight/).)

CMS requires that OPOs work with tissue banks and cooperate in:

- Screening and referral of potential tissue donors
- Obtaining informed consent from families of potential tissue donors
- Retrieval, processing, preservation, storage, and distribution of tissues
- Providing designated requestor training[^10] Beyond setting these
  requirements, CMS is not directly involved in oversight of the tissue
  industry. One former CMS staff member noted that, in the early 2000s, there
  was concern that _not_ _enough_ tissue banking was happening, which led to
  these requirements. However, multiple former HHS staff and industry experts we
  spoke with told us that, as the industry has grown, the incentives and scale
  of tissue procurement now create worrying distortions where some OPOs
  unofficially consider themselves “tissue-first and organs-second.”

FDA regulates the clinical practice of tissue procurement—focusing primarily on
the safety of the tissue being procured and procurement process—but not the
business practices around it. Bloom heard from former government staff members
that tissue procurement oversight is extremely siloed. No agency routinely has
insight into tissue processor financials or business operations. In practice,
this means there is little to no oversight over either key procurement practices
(such as approaching families for donation) or over potential conflicts of
interest for OPO leadership, such as a compensated consulting role at a tissue
processor or ownership of stock in a publicly-traded tissue processor such as
CryoLife.

**There is no single government agency with oversight over both organ and tissue
procurement**, despite how intertwined these activities are. This exacerbates
the overall opacity of OPO operations, financials, and conflicts of interest.
There is often cost-shifting within OPOs related to organ and tissue finances,
including using taxpayer dollars meant for organ recovery to essentially
subsidize private tissue processing interests.[^11]

### Classification and regulation

FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) regulates tissue
products under CFR Title 21, Part 1271, which includes any “human cell, tissue,
and cellular- and tissue-based product,” referred to as
HCT/Ps.[^12]<sup>,</sup>[^13] The FDA’s primary focus is on safety during
processing, requiring tissue processors “to screen and test donors, to prepare
and follow written procedures for the prevention of the spread of communicable
disease, and to maintain records.”[^14]

Tissue products are regulated differently depending on their classification as
“minimally manipulated” or not. The FDA defines “minimally manipulated” products
as:

- Products that retain the original characteristics of the tissue
- Products that are intended to serve the same function in the transplant
  recipients’ body (described as homologous use)
- Tissue that is not combined with any additional products, except for water or
  an agent for sterilization or storage (provided that agent does not alter the
  original characteristics of the tissue)
- Products that do not have a systemic effect on the transplant recipient[^15]
  In practice, this means that a bone shaped into a screw or ground into chips
  would be considered minimally manipulated, while demineralized bone turned
  into a gel would be _more_ than minimally manipulated. Products that are more
  than minimally manipulated are regulated as both HCT/Ps and as drugs, devices,
  and/or biological products. The additional regulations as a medical device
  mean that the product must undergo a pre-marketing approval process, including
  clinical trials. The different regulations were developed under a tiered,
  risk-based approach, with the understanding that the lengthier or more
  detailed the processing, the more areas there are for manufacturing errors.

In effect this means that the less the product is processed, the less it is
subject to regulation — and tissue processors have a clear stake in maintaining
the definitions of minimally manipulated and homologous use.

### Lobbying and industry influence on regulation 

The American Association of Tissue Banks (AATB) is an influential industry
membership association that promotes the use of donated tissue and sets some
voluntary standards. Tissue banks can be accredited through the AATB, but
accreditation is entirely voluntary.

The AATB has also emerged as an influential lobbying voice for the tissue
industry. Investigative reporting in 2012 detailed that Kevin Cmunt—then an
official at the tissue bank AlloSource, and subsequently an OPO CEO—bragged
during a panel session at an AATB meeting that “AATB has traditionally worked
very closely with FDA, and in many cases led the FDA in regulatory
requirements."[^16] The AATB has also threatened litigation against FDA to
prevent further regulation.[^17]

In 2007, Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-NY) introduced legislation that would have
established mandatory requirements for what banks had to tell donor families, as
well as try to limit the profits companies can make from the donation[^18], but
later confirmed the bill died after heavy lobbying by the industry.[^19]

This seems to be part of a pattern: in 2019, the LA Times published a 7-part
investigative series into a decades-long effort from the “multibillion-dollar
global body parts industry” to influence policy.[^20] The LA Times outlined
tactics including giving Medical Examiners gifts, sponsorships, and other
payouts to enlist their support for regulatory and legislative efforts to
increase OPOs’ access to tissue recovery at county morgues, even while
compromising death investigations[^21] and amid donor family complaints of
misleading consent tactics.[^22]

The LA Times even noted that Christina Strong—an OPO General Counsel “who has
long worked for the nation’s human tissue procurement industry”—attempted to
coordinate efforts to obstruct the paper’s investigation.[^23]

Most recently, the AATB argued against CMS’s decision in the 2020 Final Rule to
use improved outcome measures and set higher performance standards for
OPOs.[^24]

## Safety in tissue processing

FDA enforcement reports, warning letters, and recalls from the past twenty years
detail numerous issues at tissue processors and tissue banks across the country.
Enforcement reports from 2022 alone include near-weekly issues, from skin, bone,
and tendons being distributed from donors who were not adequately tested to
possible contamination of amniotic fluid.[^25]

Previous issues identified by FDA inspectors have included such quality control
failures as tissue materials contaminated by _Clostridium_ and _Staphylococcus_
bacteria, dirty cleaning materials left out in areas where tissues were
stored,[^26] and tissue processors failing to maintain adequate screening
procedures to prevent the spread of infectious disease.[^27]

**Safety issues such as these have proved fatal to patients.** In 2020, Azyio
Biologics recalled a bone-based product after four patients who received
transplants tested positive for tuberculosis.[^28] Subsequently, CDC found that
113 people received transplants from a single donor who had undetected
tuberculosis. **Three people died from tuberculosis as a result.** For all other
transplant recipients, treatment for tuberculosis did not start until an average
of 69 days after the transplant—a dangerously long delay.[^29]

Unfortunately, as Professor Michele Goodwin has written, these “scandals are
treated as episodic rather than systemic of a renegade, unregulated
industry."[^30] When coupled with financial incentives that reward volume, the
lack of safety standards become particularly problematic. As one tissue
coordinator told us: “When it comes to the quality of tissue we send out, there
has been a definite trend toward accepting more and more questionable tissue
with regards to disease processes, decomposition, infections, and the like. I've
actually been told by the director of the tissue department to send in
questionable tissue that has obvious concerns, because ‘Even if they throw it
out, we'll still get paid something for it.’”

**Serious safety issues like these make it clear that there are major gaps in
federal oversight.**

For instance, there is no easy, expedient way to track donated tissue materials
from a single donor to the hundreds of recipients who may receive a transplant.
Although imperfect, such a system does exist in organ donation. However, FDA
does not regularly have jurisdiction over end users of the products it
regulates, except during recalls. The agency can and does require that tissue
banks track the hospitals and clinics to which products are distributed, but can
only encourage tracking to the final transplant recipient,[^31] which is
arguably the most important step, especially when tissue product recalls can
involve tens of thousands of grafts.[^32]

While an August 2022 bipartisan Senate Finance Committee hearing detailed deadly
failures in oversight of organ donation in the United States,[^33] tissue
processing may actually contain even fewer safeguards. In both systems, the
result is potentially fatal for patients as well as emotionally damaging for
families who have no assurance that their loved ones will be treated with
respect and dignity.

### CryoLife: a history of deadly failures

In November 2001, 23-year-old Brian Lykins died following a routine knee surgery
after contracting an infection from a contaminated tissue transplant. A Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) investigation found that CryoLife, one
of the country’s largest tissue processors, had processed and shipped tissues
from a donor whose body had not been refrigerated for over 19 hours and was
infected with _Clostridium_ bacteria. In addition to Mr. Lykins, 27 other
patients contracted severe infections from tissues processed by CryoLife during
this time.[^34] An FDA inspection the following year found numerous process
failures, including a “failure to adequately inspect or test incoming product.”
[^35]

This was neither the first nor the last time a patient would become seriously
ill or die because of CryoLife’s failure to adhere to safety protocols. Just two
years after Mr. Lykins’ death, another teenager became seriously ill after
receiving a knee ligament transplant that was infected with _Staphylococcus_
bacteria.[^36]

Between 1996 and 2002, 33 patients became ill and four patients died from fungal
infections contracted from CryoLife-processed heart valves.[^37] At the time,
CryoLife processed 70% of the nation’s heart valves. However, after Mr. Lykins’
death in 2001, the FDA only recalled soft tissue products — not heart
valves.[^38]

The problems at CryoLife did not stop there, even after two more patients died
in 2009 and 2013. A 2013 FDA warning letter to the company details numerous
safety violations, including: a lack of “active environmental monitoring…in
critical classified areas;” the use of municipal water when preparing
disinfectant solutions, even when testing revealed “consistent bioburden levels
too numerous to count” in the water supply; and a lack of adequate staff
training, such as “poor aseptic techniques.”[^39]

Despite being plagued by countless safety violations, FDA recalls, and warnings
— and despite being directly responsible for harming and even killing patients —
**CryoLife continues to operate.** In 2022, the company rebranded as Artivion
and reported almost $300 million in revenue.[^40]

## Consent in tissue donation

Much of the public are unaware of the specifics of tissue procurement, and
studies have found that family approaches for tissue donation routinely lack key
elements of informed consent. Some families may not even know that they are
working with more than one organization or that their loved one’s tissues are
being used to generate thousands of dollars of revenue.

As one expert told Bloom, “the general public has no idea what’s going on in the
tissue world, even donor families who are interacting with an OPO or tissue
bank. From some conversations I’ve had with donor families, [it’s clear] they
don’t realize there’s a distinction between OPOs and tissue banks, since there’s
just one person they talk to.”

A 2001 report on tissue donation consent from the Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) found issues including:

- “Tissue banks often request consent over the telephone, rather than in person.
- Many tissue banks rely on staff from other organizations to obtain consent.
  There may be little training and accountability of external tissue requestors.
- Tissue banks provide donor families with little written material at the time
  of donation.”[^41]

The OIG recommended a number of improvements to how the tissue banking industry
approaches informed consent, including providing written disclosures, better
marking of donated tissue throughout the processing process, more accountability
for those requesting consent, and periodic public disclosure about tissue banks’
financing.

In our conversations with experts, they described a system that has changed
little in the past twenty years:

- In a
  [2010 study](https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/395031-consentsiminoffstudy-2010.html)
  by researchers Laura Siminoff and Heather Traino, 70 percent of donor families
  said they would object to a loved one’s tissue going to a for-profit business,
  yet fewer than one in five said they’d been told that the harvested tissues
  could go to a for-profit company.[^42] The LA Times reported that “Some
  families say they feel [OPOs] misled them into agreeing to [tissue]
  procurements.”[^43]

- A 2013 study of over 1,000 consent conversations found that only three
  families were offered written materials explaining donation, and no
  conversation included the fact that tissue materials may be sent
  internationally. This study also found that conversations with younger, white
  family members were more likely to have more elements of informed consent than
  conversations with older family members and people of color.[^44]

- A 2015 study found that roughly half of tissue banks surveyed did not include
  the fact that tissue may be used for cosmetic purposes on an authorization
  form.[^45]

### Case study in consent-related issues: Nevada Donor Network 

In one case involving the Nevada Donor Network—which is currently under
investigation from the House Oversight Committee regarding conflicts of interest
in its tissue processing business[^46]—a donor family alleged that the OPO “made
[representations] in order to induce consent, were false, misleading, contained
material misrepresentations and omissions of fact, and were undertaken in bad
faith” and that the OPO “exceeded the scope of their consent and substantially
disfigured their mother’s body”.[^47]

The OPO’s handling of this case prompted one of the Nevada Donor Network’s
founders to remove herself from the Nevada organ and tissue donation registry,
citing concerns about a lack of transparency regarding the for-profit nature of
tissue processing, and telling the Las Vegas Review-Journal: “The
revenue-generating business venture of tissue donation has sullied the
charitable desire of good people to donate lifesaving solid organs, like kidneys
and hearts and lungs. They should not be linked in consent forms, in business
operations or in patient education…The fact that you can’t say no and have it
stand after you die horrifies me…‘No’ doesn’t mean ‘no’ here, and ‘yes’ has no
boundaries.”[^48] The OPO subsequently settled this claim out of court.[^49]

### Misleading tactics 

Experts we spoke to cited a number of misleading tactics routinely used to
obtain “consent” from families. **The AATB’s own guidance suggests refraining
from any mention of processing tissue**, processors, or products, and instead
focusing on “sharing” and “gifts.”[^50]

The unclear language used in consent conversations may contribute to confusion,
as families may not question the need to “prepare the body” ahead of a potential
donation. One expert said, “It was so frequent it became normalized within the
system, framed within the context of…’preparing the body.’ The [organization
would] claim that they’re just getting standard medical information…but as part
of that process, they were stealing from the body.”

A coordinator from the Midwest Transplant Network OPO in Kansas shared
information regarding a case in which “a family was lied to so our call center
could get them on the phone to pressure them into donating.” Specifically, the
coordinator wrote that ”When the [donor’s] family responded to a text by
texting, they were told the phone didn’t accept text messages. It appears that
the family was only interested in donating the brain to a university for
research purposes, so we told them they had to call, and pretended not to
acknowledge what they said. The brain donation would have offered no financial
benefit to our organization.” The family was told they could only communicate
with the OPO by calling (which was untrue; the OPO could read their texts),
because the OPO wanted the opportunity to verbally pressure the family into a
broader consent for donation than they’d initially indicated they were
comfortable with.

As one researcher noted: **“You only have to listen to a few [consent] calls.
[Families] can’t bury loved ones due to funeral costs, even though they’re
giving an enormous amount of money to tissue banks and OPOs.”**

Although experts told Bloom that tissue recovery organizations may invest in
improving these conversations, the motives are not necessarily altruistic. As
one expert told us: “[Organizations] invest in how to communicate across
different communities, which you could say is helpful, if there are language
barriers. But that’s not what they’re getting at. It really is about how to
maximize the return on the ask, and doing so as expediently as possible.”

## Financial incentives and conflicts of interest

Current OPO financial reimbursement structures create a greater financial
incentive for tissue recovery than for lifesaving organ procurement.[^51]

Tissue companies like Stryker and Becton, Dickson and Company (BD) reported over
$17 billion and $20 billion in total 2021 revenue, respectively, and operate in
up to 190 countries.[^52]<sup>,</sup>[^53] Demand for tissues is driven by the
medical community, in addition to biomedical researchers, pharmaceutical
companies, and cosmetic companies, which need human tissue samples for testing
and research.

### Organs vs. tissues: balancing revenue and resources 

According to one former CMS staff member, it’s up to individual OPOs to balance
their tissue and organ procurement work — except that tissue procurement relates
to a multi-billion dollar for-profit business with clear financial incentives
for increased volume, while organ procurement is a non-profit business. Because
organ procurement - unlike tissue procurement - is funded on a cost
reimbursement basis by Medicare, OPO finances are not nearly as affected by the
volume of organs recovered as tissue, so there is much less direct financial
benefit for higher procurement/performance.[^54]

There are organizational benefits to maintaining status as an OPO, because it
creates access to hospitals and ensures the OPO will receive patient
referrals—which are highly lucrative for tissue procurement. However, as one
expert noted, **“underperformance as an OPO has zero impact on the bottom
line.”** Issues found on the organ procurement side—up to and including
decertification—would not keep an OPO from continuing tissue procurement (though
it could make it more difficult by impacting hospital access). For many OPOs,
this means “tissue becomes the safety net,” as we heard from one expert, in the
event of decertification—meaning that a decertified OPO could keep operating its
non-organ recovery business lines. This may contribute to the feeling that
decertification is an empty threat for OPOs whose primary revenue driver is
tissue.

**OPO annual revenues from tissue procurement vary widely, from $4.5 million at
Kentucky Organ Donor Affiliates up to $411.9 million at LifeNet
(Virginia).**[^55]<sup>,</sup>[^56] **(Note: not all OPOs report these numbers
publicly.)**

Massive tissue revenues led experts we spoke with to describe some OPOs as
“**tissue banks with an organ procurement side business.**” One expert Bloom
spoke with saw several cases of “serious leadership issues” at OPOs while
working with the OPTN Membership and Professional Standards Committee. At these
OPOs, executives were “taking money out of OPO operations to support tissue
[procurement], to the detriment of organ procurement.” These were described as
the “sloppy, extreme cases,” which only came to light because of serious safety
issues at the OPO.

LifeNet, one of the largest OPO tissue processors, was described as treating
organ procurement as their “side hustle,” while they made “tons of money” on
tissue procurement.[^57]

In lobbying materials, OPOs and UNOS often try to obfuscate this dynamic by
highlighting that organs and tissue can both be recovered from the same donor,
implying that OPOs do not need to choose between the two goals.[^58] However,
the tension most often presents in staffing and resource allocation decisions,
rather than on a case-by-case basis.

Specifically, OPOs are often grossly understaffed on frontline coordinators for
organ donation, and heavily resourced and staffed for tissue recovery
operations.[^59] This problem is further compounded by the lack of transparent
data about donors who might have become organ donors but who instead only
donated tissue. Interviewees we spoke to routinely talked about staffing
discrepancies at some OPOs between organ procurement and tissue procurement. One
former transplant nurse coordinator described how her organ procurement team had
three staff members, while the tissue procurement team had eight. While her
staff were working 24 hour shifts because the OPO refused to pay for the
additional staff necessary to cut shifts to a safer 12 hours, the tissue
procurement teams had enough staff to be “stumbling over each other.”

This directly impacts the thousands of patients waiting for a lifesaving organ
transplant: studies have shown that the timing of a donation request directly
affects the likelihood of a family or next of kin consenting to donation,
suggesting that an overworked, understaffed department cannot successfully
recover the true number of potential organ donors — the very mission an OPO is
tasked with.[^60] CMS could mitigate some of these issues by transparently
publishing staffing data for all OPOs for both organ and tissue procurement, as
well as by publishing OPO process data (e.g., how often and how quickly OPOs
respond to referrals) as suggested by the Senate Finance Committee.[^61]

### Conflicts of interest

Different parts of the tissue processing industry are deeply entwined, which can
create conflicts of interest.

OPO executives make up the AATB Board, along with representatives from tissue
processing companies.[^62] The immediate past Chair is the current Senior Vice
President of New England Donor Services; other Board Members have included the
Director of Tissue Donor Services for LifeCenter Northwest, the Vice President
of Tissue Operations at the Nevada Donor Network, and the Chief Clinical Officer
for Kentucky Organ Donor Affiliates.

Other overlaps between OPOs and tissue processing companies include:

- Executives from five OPOs (Donor Alliance Network, Iowa Donor Network,
  Mid-America Transplant, ConnectLife, and Gift of Hope) also sit on the Board
  of Allosource, a large tissue processing company. These OPOs own stakes in
  Allosource ranging from $8 million to $26.4 million.[^63]<sup>,</sup>[^64]

- Executives from Midwest Transplant Network, LifeShare of Oklahoma and New
  Jersey Sharing Network sit on the board of MTF Biologics, another large tissue
  processing company.[^65]

- LifeNet Virginia operates seven subsidiaries, five of which are focused on
  tissue procurement and processing.[^66]

- Nevada Donor Network, in “joint venture” with Australian company Australian
  Biologics, owns a 22,000 square foot tissue processor called Origin Biologics,
  a conflict which is currently being investigated by the House Oversight
  Committee.[^67]

- LifeLink of Georgia has paid almost $2 million in fees to TransLife Tissue
  Bank, a tissue bank run by a LifeLink Board Member.[^68]

**Some OPOs have multiple subsidiaries and a global presence. LifeNet, for
instance, spends nearly $1 million on global sales representation, while
LifeLink of Georgia owns a $250,000 stake in HCT Regenerative (a tissue
processing company based in Hong Kong).**[^69]<sup>,</sup>[^70] **LifeLink sells
this company tissue and bone material, and receives a royalty on any allografts
sold.**

### Instances of corruption

While industry opacity prevents many abuses from coming to light, some
high-profile examples have emerged.

For example, in one case—which eventually resulted in the criminal conviction of
two OPO executives in Alabama,[^71] and for which the whistleblower was
threatened with being “cremated alive”[^72] —an OPO staffer filed a complaint
with the OPTN’s Membership and Professional Standards Committee (MPSC) regarding
allegations of a money laundering scheme. As NPR later reported, the OPO had
given a contract to a local funeral home to be ”the one place where tissue was
taken from corpses” in exchange for kickbacks.[^73] The complaint filed with the
MPSC called on UNOS to conduct a full investigation,[^74] but the MPSC did not
take meaningful action. As summarized by the Senate Finance Committee in its
August 2022 investigation memo: “The Committee was unable to identify what, if
any, steps UNOS took to investigate the financial improprieties reported to them
in March 2011. Instead, it seems UNOS simply rolled the complaint into a broader
ongoing review of the OPO for OPTN policy and procedure violations.”[^75]

An expert we spoke with noted that it’s “unclear how regularly these cases are
happening under the radar, because **HRSA and CMS do not look at the financials
of tissue at all**, except in extenuating circumstances.”

Separately, we heard from one OPO CEO who had been in front of the MPSC for an
apparent violation related to organ recovery who said that “after the first day
of MPSC proceedings, [a senior member of the MPSC] pulled me aside at the hotel
bar and said ‘this will go on for two years and cost your OPO millions of
dollars; or else it can all just go away if you give me your OPO’s tissue
business.’” Because there are no public disclosures related to financial
interests in tissue procurement and processing, there is a risk that members of
MPSC, rather than providing oversight of OPOs, could actually be engaging in
business development to further their own personal interests.

Compounding the problem is that the MPSC does not make case details publicly
available. In fact, at the August 2022 Senate Finance Committee hearing, Senator
Elizabeth Warren characterized UNOS’s current oversight as “sitting on your
hands while people die.”[^76]

In a separate incident around the same time as the Alabama case, a New
Jersey-based body broker named Michael Mastromarino pleaded guilty to enterprise
corruption, reckless endangerment and body stealing. As part of the scheme,
Mastromarino established a network of undertakers, whom he paid up to $1,000 per
corpse, and harvested tissue from bodies without consent. According to filings,
Mastromarino also harvested body parts from people with cancer, H.I.V. and other
communicable diseases, and forged paperwork - including consent forms and death
certificates - to make it appear as if the donor met clinical and legal
requirements for tissue donation.[^77] As NPR later reported, “a lot of the
things that seemed so shocking about his case turned out to be routine aspects
of the business. They were surprising only because so little is known about
human tissue donation.”[^78]

### Inequities in care

There’s no regulatory requirement for tissue donation to benefit the community
the tissue comes from, and allocation decisions about where OPOs should send
tissues are at the discretion of the OPO, because—unlike for organs—allocation
is not prescribed by an oversight body. This means that **allocation is governed
by the market for tissues**, rather than by impact or patient need.

Major users of donated tissue materials include biomedical companies, cosmetic
companies, and research centers that need human tissue samples for research
purposes. At times, this has meant that skin banks for burn victims have been
unable to get the tissue needed to serve their patients, as tissue processors
could sell it at higher prices to biomedical and cosmetic companies.[^79]

As one researcher told Bloom, “It’s absolutely, deeply unethical that **we don’t
know how many times someone in our community is asked to give tissue and we
can’t track where that tissue goes and if there is a return to community
benefit**.”

Studies have found that patients in high socioeconomic status areas have
increased access to organ transplants;[^80] that the organ donation system does
not adequately, equitably serve patients, donors, and families of color;[^81]
and that organ transplant recipients are more likely to be white, highly
educated, and live in higher socioeconomic status zip codes.[^82] In contrast,
Black patients spend a longer time on the waitlist,[^83] and are less likely to
be rated an “appropriate candidate” for a transplant than a white patient.[^84]

These disparities are seen in tissue procurement and transplantation as well,
where communities that donate the most are not seeing the most impact or
benefits. Tissue transplants are frequently used in cosmetic, reconstructive, or
joint surgeries that may only be available to wealthier patients with private
insurance.

For example, studies have found that the average cost for a knee tendon repair
is $13,000, a procedure that commonly uses a tissue transplant.[^85] For a
patient with Medicare, the out-of-pocket cost may range between $414 to
$719.[^86] Because few tissue transplants are lifesaving, families may be more
likely to skip these costly procedures. **Tissue transplants are used in
surgeries that can be important for mobility and quality of life, but may not be
affordable for families who cannot afford unexpected expenses.**[^87]

One of the most common uses of donated bone tissue is dental putty, frequently
used in dental implants. There are wide disparities in dental care in the United
States: At least half of American adults do not have dental insurance,[^88]
while children from low-income families are three times as likely to have
untreated cavities as children from high-income families.[^89] Dental implants,
which can cost thousands of dollars per tooth, are a costly use of donated
tissue material that many Americans cannot benefit from.

Issues persist when tissue is sold internationally. A recent World Health
Organization (WHO) report found that “long-term or ongoing reliance on external
sources can expose the ‘importing’ national health system to an unpredictable
supply in terms of quantity and quality and to commercialization, with imposed
higher or unacceptable costs limiting access. Conversely, ‘exporting’ countries
may be under-serving their own population of potential recipients by diminishing
local availability." [^90]

## Recommendations for better regulation

Part of the urgency, and difficulty, in developing stronger regulations for the
tissue processing industry is because the field is a rapidly growing, developing
area of medicine. Since the FDA finalized the Current Good Tissue Practices in
2005, there have been major developments in procedures like pancreatic islet
cell transplantation and the transplantation of composite tissue allografts
(which include procedures such as face or hand transplants).

Experts describe a field with “a lot of gray areas,” where regulation has not
always kept up with changes in medical technology. For instance, the FDA’s
definitions of “minimally manipulated” and “homologous use” may be challenged
when products combine multiple types of human tissue or are used in complex
procedures. Furthermore, oversight is split between multiple bodies. For
example, veins taken in the context of organ procurement fall under the
jurisdiction of the OPTN—yet those same veins would be classified as tissue if
taken alone.

In one recent case, which is currently the subject of a legal battle in the
Wayne County Probate Court in Michigan, the donor’s family had consented to
donate organs but not tissue. However, tissue was recovered, which appeared to
interfere with the autopsy; this was particularly important as the death had
been flagged as "suspicious or unusual" by doctors at the hospital where the
donor had died.

In a recorded phone call, the county Medical Examiner told the donor’s family:
“In the state of Michigan, you can remove organs for donation and transplant
into someone else without consent of the Medical Examiner. That only requires
the next-of-kin, and it’s my understanding that some organs were donated, and
unfortunately, in this case, [the OPO] removed tissue which would've been
vertebral column, like the backbone… [The problem is that] how we classify the
organs and tissues may need some clarification... How I classify [backbone] is a
tissue. How [the OPO] classif[ies] that is an organ.”[^91]

This is emblematic of the fragmented, siloed nature of tissue regulation.
Changes are urgently needed to increase patient safety and restore public trust
in the system.

### Information sharing between government agencies

To address the fragmented nature of tissue industry regulation, stronger
information sharing is needed between FDA, CMS, and HRSA. It is crucial to close
these gaps in oversight and ensure that all aspects of tissue procurement and
processing are being properly overseen.

Government agencies and Congress should support:

- **Sharing OPO and tissue processor audit reports between FDA and CMS**. Issues
  found by either agency should trigger further investigation by the second
  agency. The ultimate goal should be to increase patient safety by fully
  monitoring each aspect of procurement and transplant.
- **Faster, more responsive information sharing between FDA, CMS, HRSA, and CDC
  when responding to adverse event reports and deviations from best practices.**
  These agencies must be able to quickly and accurately notify hospitals and
  patients in the event of adverse events. Historically, recalls can take
  months, with agencies unable to accurately track every recipient of
  potentially hazardous tissue.

### Increase traceability of tissue products

A key component of adverse event reporting and tracking is traceability. The WHO
has called traceability of human-based tissue products an “absolute
prerequisite” for ensuring patient safety.[^92] And while the OPTN does
implement a system for tracking organs from donor to recipient, there is
currently an inadequate tracking system for tissue donations and transplants.
The European Commission updated traceability guidance in 2022, after finding the
original 2001 guidance was now “outdated” and not keeping “pace with this
rapidly changing sector.”[^93] **The U.S. should follow this example and update
the 2005 tissue product guidance as well.**

Specifically, **FDA should require a universal tracking system** for all
human-tissue based products that is easy to integrate with global standards, and
covers the entire process from recovery to transplant. Currently, many tissue
banks voluntarily use the ISBT 128 code system for donor identification, but
this labeling standard only covers the final label present during distribution;
it’s optional for tissue processors to use the same label during recovery and
processing.[^94] A 2015 survey of 112 tissue banks found that only 27 banks
tracked incoming transplant records from hospitals and clinicians.[^95] The use
of multiple labels throughout procurement and processing has the potential to
create serious tracking issues in the event of an adverse event report. With
thousands of tissue products shipped internationally every year, it’s critical
that these products be easily and quickly traceable back to the country and
donor of origin.

To support these efforts, **CMS should consider requiring hospitals and surgical
centers to track tissue transplants and recipients**. As a payer for these
procedures, CMS may have authority over end users that FDA lacks. Currently, The
Joint Commission voluntary standards for hospitals include patient-level
tracing, providing a strong example for CMS to consider.[^96]

### Require transparency to increase safety and equity 

Currently, researchers cannot state with certainty the number of tissue donors
in the U.S. last year, the types of grafts procured, the types of transplants
received, or the communities procurement and transplant occurred in. However, as
one expert noted, these are “knowable, countable numbers,” that are currently
tracked in other countries. For example, Canada collects data on the types of
tissue transplants, while Australia and New Zealand publish extensive monthly
data, breaking down the number of tissue donors by gender, province, and
age.[^97]<sup>,</sup>[^98] **This data is crucial for identifying trends,
accurately counting adverse events, and better understanding the inequities of
tissue procurement and transplantation.**

CMS should require OPOs to include data on tissue procurement in reporting to
CMS. Because OPOs must provide this data to processors in order to clear tissue
donors, providing this data would not require new processes. OPOs should report
and aggregate existing data, such as:

- How many potential donors are evaluated, approached, and authorized
- The number and type of tissue procurement by location, donor gender, donor
  race and ethnicity, and donor age
- The number of transplants by tissue type (i.e., the number of skin grafts, the
  number of bone grafts, etc.)
- The number of tissue transplants, by recipient gender, recipient race and
  ethnicity, and recipient age in each OPO’s Donation Service Area (DSA)
- The number and type of adverse events reported to the company or OPO
- The number and type of referrals for tissue procurement in a given DSA
- The number and type of potential tissue donors identified in a given DSA
  stratified by demographic
- The number and type of authorizations for tissue procurement by type of graft
  (whole eye, cornea, full-thickness skin, bone, heart for valves, etc.)
  stratified by demographic
- The number and type of donors by graft in a given DSA stratified by
  demographic

This data could be de-identified and publicly shared for greater transparency.

With increased data collection and transparency—including financial resource
allocation and OPO staffing data—CMS, Congress, researchers, and other
stakeholders will be able to accurately identify trends in tissue procurement
and transplantation, including inequities. This is a necessary step towards
being able to address issues and ensure a more ethical system of procurement and
transplant.

Regulators should also **require OPOs to publish potential conflicts of interest
related to tissue procurement.** Pro-transparency OPO leaders have voiced
support for CMS to require OPOs to publish a statement of financial
relationships between OPOs, OPO leadership, and external tissue operations.[^99]
Doing so would bring increased transparency to a currently opaque system.

## Conclusion

By some estimates, up to 2.5 million tissue grafts are transplanted every
year.[^100] Tissue procurement and processing is currently a multi-billion
dollar industry that has grown rapidly since the first tissue bank was founded
in 1949.[^101] By some estimates, the global tissue banking market may be as
large as $3 trillion by 2026.[^102]

Although many patients do benefit from tissue transplants every year, the
industry has been plagued by safety issues, inadequate oversight, and little
accountability for patients and their families. Some OPO leadership have
consistently made choices to prioritize tissue recovery over organ procurement,
such as directing staff resources to tissue procurement rather than organ
procurement. Decisions like this have a direct impact on the thousands of
patients waiting for a lifesaving organ transplant.

The tissue industry urgently needs regulatory changes to bring increased
transparency and safety to a necessary—yet currently opaque and unsafe—system.
As medical technology advances, the tissue transplant field will continue to
grow. It is crucial that regulations keep up with these changes, for the sake of
patient safety, public trust in the system, and equity in transplantation.

## Appendix A: List of OPOs registered as tissue banks

<table>
<tr>
<td><strong>Organ Procurement Organization</strong><span markdown="1">[^103]</span>
</td>
<td><strong>Region</strong>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Alabama Organ Center
</td>
<td>AL
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Center for Organ Recovery and Education
</td>
<td>Western PA & WV
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Donor Alliance
</td>
<td>CO
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Donor Network of Arizona
</td>
<td>AZ
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Donor Network West
</td>
<td>Northern CA
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Gift of Hope Organ & Tissue Donor Network
</td>
<td>IL
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Gift of Life
</td>
<td>Eastern PA & Southern NJ
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Gift of Life Michigan
</td>
<td>MI
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Indiana Organ Procurement Organization
</td>
<td>IN
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Kentucky Organ Donor Affiliates
</td>
<td>KY, Western WV & OH
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LifeBanc
</td>
<td>Northeast OH
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LifeCenter Northwest Organ Donation Network
</td>
<td>WA, ID, MT
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LifeCenter Organ Donor Network
</td>
<td>Southwest OH & Southeast IN
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LifeGift Organ Donation Center
</td>
<td>TX
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LifeLine of Ohio
</td>
<td>Central OH
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LifeLink of Florida
</td>
<td>Western FL
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LifeNet
</td>
<td>VA & Northwest WV
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Lifeshare of Oklahoma
</td>
<td>OK
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LifeSharing - A Donate Life Organization
</td>
<td>CA
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Lifesource Upper Midwest Organ Procurement Organization
</td>
<td>MN, SD, Western WI
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LiveOnNY
</td>
<td>NYC
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mid-America Transplant Services
</td>
<td>MO & Southern IL
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Nevada Donor Network
</td>
<td>NV
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>New England Organ Bank
</td>
<td>CT, ME, NH, RI & VT
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>New Jersey Sharing Network
</td>
<td>NJ
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>OneLegacy
</td>
<td>CA
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>OurLegacy
</td>
<td>FL
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tennessee Donor Services
</td>
<td>TN, KY, VA
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>The Living Legacy Foundation of Maryland
</td>
<td>MD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Upstate New York Transplant Services Inc
</td>
<td>Western NY
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Versiti
</td>
<td>WI
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Washington Regional Transplant Community
</td>
<td>Washington, D.C., & Northern VA
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>We Are Sharing Hope SC
</td>
<td>SC
</td>
</tr>
</table>

<!-- Footnotes themselves at the bottom. -->

## Notes

[^1]:
    “[Despite low performance, organ collection group gets new federal contract.](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/despite-low-performance-organ-collection-group-gets-new-federal-contract/2019/02/04/9b9ba2aa-2895-11e9-b2fc-721718903bfc_story.html)
    <span style="text-decoration:underline;">”</span>Washington Post, 2019.

[^2]:
    _[“Transforming Organ Donation in America Appendix A.” ](https://www.bridgespan.org/bridgespan/Images/articles/transforming-organ-donation-in-america/Bridgespan-OPO-Report-FINAL-Appendix-A.pdf)The
    Bridgespan Group, 2020. “​​Unlike SACs for organs, prices for tissue and
    non-organ body parts are subject to market forces, meaning increased demand
    can increase prices and bring additional revenue for every incremental
    tissue recovery. Consequently, OPOs have greater financial incentives to
    focus more on tissue recovery compared to their incentives to recover
    lifesaving organs.”_

[^3]:
    Because tissue donations can create hundreds of different products,
    statistics for this figure vary.

[^4]:
    [“Regulatory Considerations for Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue-Based Products: Minimal Manipulation and Homologous Use.”](https://www.fda.gov/media/109176/download)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2020.

[^5]:
    [“Tissue & Product Catalog: Orthopedics.”](https://www.mtfbiologics.org/docs/default-source/default-document-library/corp_catalog_digital_ortho_r9.pdf)
    MTF Biologics, 2020.

[^6]:
    _
    [“Transforming Organ Donation in America Appendix A.” ](https://www.bridgespan.org/bridgespan/Images/articles/transforming-organ-donation-in-america/Bridgespan-OPO-Report-FINAL-Appendix-A.pdf)The
    Bridgespan Group, 2020. “​​Unlike SACs for organs, prices for tissue and
    non-organ body parts are subject to market forces, meaning increased demand
    can increase prices and bring additional revenue for every incremental
    tissue recovery. Consequently, OPOs have greater financial incentives to
    focus more on tissue recovery compared to their incentives to recover
    lifesaving organs.”_

[^7]:
    [“Accredited Banks.”](https://www.aatb.org/accredited-bank-search) American
    Association of Tissue Banks, 2022.

[^8]:
    [“Access to human tissue for research and development.”](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4428037/#:~:text=The%20tissues%20they%20stored%E2%80%94heart,human%20tissues%20has%20increased%20dramatically.)
    _EMBO Reports_, 2015.

[^9]:
    [“Recovery Partners and Services.”](https://www.mtfbiologics.org/who-we-serve/donors-community/recovery-partners-services)
    MTF Biologics, 2022.

[^10]:
    “[CMS Manual System: Pub. 100-07 State Operations.](https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Guidance/Transmittals/downloads/R115SOMA.pdf)”
    Department of Health & Human Services, Centers for Medicare &
    Medicaid, 2014.

[^11]:
    [“Transforming Organ Donation in America.”](https://www.bridgespan.org/bridgespan/Images/articles/transforming-organ-donation-in-america/Bridgespan-OPO-Report-FINAL-Appendix-A.pdf)
    The Bridgespan Group, 2020.

[^12]:
    [“Tissue & Tissue Products.”](https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/tissue-tissue-products)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2021.

[^13]:
    For a complete list of tissues regulated as HCT/Ps, see:
    [“FDA Regulation of Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue-Based Products (HCT/P’s) Product List.”](https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/tissue-tissue-products/fda-regulation-human-cells-tissues-and-cellular-and-tissue-based-products-hctps-product-list)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2018.

[^14]:
    [“Tissue & Tissue Products.”](https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/tissue-tissue-products)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2021.

[^15]:
    If a product does produce a systemic effect, but is intended for autologous
    use, use between first- or second-degree blood relatives, or reproductive
    use, it is still exempt from additional regulation. For additional details,
    see:
    [“Regulatory Considerations for Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue-Based Products: Minimal Manipulation and Homologous Use.”](https://www.fda.gov/media/109176/download)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2020.

[^16]:
    [“The Seamy Side Of The Human Tissue Business.”](https://www.npr.org/2012/07/19/156988089/the-seamy-side-of-the-human-tissue-business)
    NPR, 2012.

[^17]:
    [ “AATB Requests Meeting with FDA to Discuss Potential Litigation.”](https://www.aatb.org/news/aatb-requests-meeting-fda-discuss-potential-litigation)
    American Association of Tissue Banks, 2022.

[^18]: “S.1479 - Safe Tissues Act.” United States Congress, 2007.
[^19]:
    [“Abusing the ‘Gift’ of Tissue Donation.”](https://www.icij.org/investigations/tissue/abusing-gift-tissue-donation/)
    International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, 2012.

[^20]:
    [“How organ and tissue donation companies worked their way into the county morgue.”](https://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-how-body-brokers-took-over-county-morgue-20190408-story.html)
    LA Times, 2019.

[^21]:
    [“In the rush to harvest body parts, death investigations have been upended.”](https://www.latimes.com/business/story/2019-10-13/body-parts-harvesting-hinders-coroner-autopsies)
    LA Times, 2019.

[^22]:
    [“Summary of findings: What can go wrong when firms harvest bodies before autopsies.”](https://www.latimes.com/business/story/2019-10-13/findings-from-the-times-investigation-bodies-of-evidence)
    LA Times, 2019.

[^23]:
    [“Executives coached coroners on how to keep body parts harvesting records secret.”](https://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-executives-coroners-body-part-harvesting-secret-20190408-story.html)
    LA Times, 2019.

[^24]:
    “[AATB Letter in response to CMS-3380-P: Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Organ Procurement Organizations Conditions for Coverage; Revisions to the Outcome Measure Requirements for Organ Procurement Organizations.](https://s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/fonteva-customer-media/00Di0000000gqonEAA/qZOWmsHC_CommentCMS3380PFinal_2_11_2020_pdf)”
    American Association of Tissue Banks, 2020.

[^25]:
    [“2022 Enforcement Reports.”](https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/ires/index.cfm)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2022.

[^26]:
    [“Order To Cease Manufacturing, Recall and Destroy HCT/Ps.”](https://wayback.archive-it.org/7993/20170406073410/https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/ComplianceActivities/AdministrativeActionsBiologics/UCM327709.pdf)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2012.

[^27]:
    [“Warning Letter: Invitrx Therapeutics Inc.”](https://www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/warning-letters/invitrx-therapeutics-inc-581182-03162020)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2020.

[^28]:
    [“Urgent Voluntary Notification: FiberCel Fiber Viable Bone Matrix (“FiberCel”) - Lot Number: NMDS210011.”](https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/recalls-biologics/urgent-voluntary-notification-fibercel-fiber-viable-bone-matrix-fibercel-lot-number-nmds210011)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2021.

[^29]:
    [“Nationwide tuberculosis outbreak in the U.S. linked to a bone graft product: an outbreak report.”](<https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(22)00425-X/fulltext>)
    _The Lancet_, 2022.

[^30]:
    [“Empires of the Flesh: Tissue and Organ Taboos.”](https://deliverypdf.ssrn.com/delivery.php?ID=141119082090099116067119077025078007050013055041044089022119072091085016072107030096036063025103104037062104004076126084126064015075086034086113068087071100007006089028003085103069083107125125086082114113087080010007110015079075093003024070095118066&EXT=pdf&INDEX=TRUE)
    _University of Minnesota Law School_, 2009.

[^31]:
    [“Human Tissue Task Force 2007 Report.”](http://wayback.archive-it.org/7993/20171114141745/https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/SafetyAvailability/TissueSafety/ucm114823.htm)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2007.

[^32]:
    [“Brief Report: Investigation into Recalled Human Tissue for Transplantation -- United States, 2005--2006.” ](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5520a6.htm)Centers
    for Disease Control and Prevention, 2006.

[^33]:
    [“A System in Need of Repair: Addressing Organizational Failures of the U.S.’s Organ Procurement and Transplant Network.”](<https://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/UNOS%20Hearing%20Confidential%20Memo%20(FOR%20RELEASE).pdf>)
    United States Senate, 2022.

[^34]:
    [“Recall is Ordered at Large Supplier of Implant Tissue.”](https://www.nytimes.com/2002/08/15/us/recall-is-ordered-at-large-supplier-of-implant-tissue.html)
    _The New York Times_, 2002.

[^35]:
    [“Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research 2002: FDA Issues Warning Letter to Tissue Firm.”](https://www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/enforcement-story-archive/center-biologics-evaluation-and-research-2002)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2002.

[^36]:
    [“Knee Ligament In a Transplant Leads to Illness.” ](https://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/05/us/knee-ligament-in-a-transplant-leads-to-illness.html)
    _The New York Times_, 2003.

[^37]:
    [“CryoLife Heart Valve Patients Cry Foul.”](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/cryolife-heart-valve-patients-cry-foul/)
    _CBS News_, 2002.

[^38]:
    [“Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research 2002: FDA Issues Warning Letter to Tissue Firm.”](https://www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/enforcement-story-archive/center-biologics-evaluation-and-research-2002)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2002.

[^39]:
    [“Warning Letter: CryoLife.”](http://web.archive.org/web/20150213040549/http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/EnforcementActions/WarningLetters/2013/ucm341423.htm)
    Food and Drug Administration, 2013.

[^40]:
    [“Artivion Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2021 Financial Results.”](https://investors.artivion.com/news-releases/news-release-details/artivion-reports-fourth-quarter-and-full-year-2021-financial)
    Artivion, 2022.

[^41]:
    [“Informed Consent in Tissue Donation: Expectations and Realities.”](https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-01-00-00440.pdf)
    Office of the Inspector General, 2001.

[^42]:
    [“Determinants of family consent to tissue donation.”](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3530615/)
    _Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery_, 2012.

[^43]:
    [“Summary of findings: What can go wrong when firms harvest tissue before autopsies.”](https://www.latimes.com/business/story/2019-10-13/findings-from-the-times-investigation-bodies-of-evidence)
    _Los Angeles Times_, 2019.

[^44]:
    [“Consenting to donation: an examination of current practices in informed consent for tissue donation in the US.” ](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3568202/)
    _Cell and Tissue Banking_, 2013.

[^45]:
    [“The 2012 and 2015 National Tissue Recovery Through Utilization Survey Report.”](https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/ntrus-report-2015.pdf)
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2015.

[^46]:
    [Letter to the President and Chief Executive Officer of Nevada Donor Network from the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Oversight and Reform](https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/2021-05-27.RK%20KP%20to%20Ferreira-NDN%20re%20Expenses.pdf),
    May 27, 2021.

[^47]:
    [“Tissue donation turns into nightmare for three sisters.”](https://www.reviewjournal.com/local/local-las-vegas/tissue-donation-turns-into-nightmare-for-three-sisters/)
    _Las Vegas Review Journal_, 2016.

[^48]:
    [“Doctor who helped create Nevada organ donor service has doubts about program.”](https://www.reviewjournal.com/local/local-las-vegas/doctor-who-helped-create-nevada-organ-donor-service-has-doubts-about-program/)
    _Las Vegas Review Journal_, 2016.

[^49]:
    [“Judge dismisses 2015 fraud lawsuit against Nevada Donor Network.”](https://www.reviewjournal.com/crime/courts/judge-dismisses-2015-fraud-lawsuit-against-nevada-donor-network-1597540/)
    _Las Vegas Review Journal_, 2019.

[^50]:
    “Guidance Document: Providing Service to Tissue Donor Families.” American
    Association of Tissue Banks, 2015.

[^51]:
    “​​Unlike SACs for organs, prices for tissue and non-organ body parts are
    subject to market forces, meaning increased demand can increase prices and
    bring additional revenue for every incremental tissue recovery.
    Consequently, OPOs have greater financial incentives to focus more on tissue
    recovery compared to their incentives to recover lifesaving organs.” from
    “Transforming Organ Donation in America Appendix A.” The Bridgespan
    Group, 2020.

[^52]:
    [“2021 Comprehensive Report.”](https://www.stryker.com/content/dam/stryker/about/annual-review/2021/SYK-001_2021%20Comprehensive%20Report.pdf#page=3)
    Stryker, 2021.

[^53]:
    [“Annual Report 2021.”](https://investors.bd.com/static-files/03868372-10f7-4930-ab98-b82c88a44f22)
    Becton, Dickson and Company, 2021.

[^54]:
    [“Transforming Organ Donation in America.”](https://www.bridgespan.org/bridgespan/Images/articles/transforming-organ-donation-in-america/Bridgespan-OPO-Report-FINAL-Appendix-A.pdf)
    The Bridgespan Group, 2020.

[^55]:
    [“Kentucky Organ Donor Affiliates, Inc., Form 990.”](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/611122515/202132929349300223/full) 2020.

[^56]:
    [“LifeNet Health, Form 990.”](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/521273592/202023189349306162/full) 2019.

[^57]:
    Under the National Organ Transplant Act, it is illegal to sell body parts.
    Instead, OPOs, tissue banks, and processors charge fees for handling and
    shipping, which the law does allow.

[^58]:
    [Notes on UNOS’ Response to the SFC Oversight Letter (PDF)](https://bloomworks.digital/organdonationreform/assets/PDF/appendix_b-sfc_letter_and_unos_response.pdf)

[^59]:
    [“Organ failure: The gatekeeper of Minnesota's organ transplant system is underperforming. It may be costing lives.”](https://www.postbulletin.com/newsmd/organ-failure-the-gatekeeper-of-minnesotas-organ-transplant-system-is-underperforming-it-may-be-costing-lives)
    Post Bulletin, 2021.

[^60]:
    “[Modifiable factors influencing relatives’ decision to offer organ donation: systematic review.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2671586/)”
    _BMJ_, 2009.

[^61]:
    [Senate Finance Committee letter to CMS](https://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/040722%20Wyden%20Grassley%20Young%20Transplant%20System%20RFI%20letter.pdf), 2022.

[^62]:
    [“Board of Governors.”](https://www.aatb.org/about/board-governors) American
    Association of Tissue Banks, 2022.

[^63]:
    [“Leadership.”](https://allosource.org/about-allosource/leadership/)
    Allosource, 2022.

[^64]:
    For details on Allosource investments, see tax filings of:
    [Mid-America Transplant Network](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/237426306);
    [Donor Alliance, Inc.](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/841003771);
    [Iowa Donor Network](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/421414092);
    [Upstate New York Transplant Services, Inc. (dba ConnectLife)](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/161172453).

[^65]:
    [“Who We Are.”](https://www.mtfbiologics.org/about-us) MTF Biologics, 2022.

[^66]:
    [“LifeNet Health, Form 990.”](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/521273592/202023189349306162/full) 2020.

[^67]:
    [Letter to the President and Chief Executive Officer of Nevada Donor Network from the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Oversight and Reform](https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/2021-05-27.RK%20KP%20to%20Ferreira-NDN%20re%20Expenses.pdf),
    May 27, 2021.

[^68]:
    [“LifeLink Foundation, Inc., Form 990.”](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/592193032/202101319349303525/full) 2020.

[^69]:
    [“LifeNet Health, Form 990.”](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/521273592/202023189349306162/full) 2020.

[^70]:
    [“LifeLink Foundation, Inc., Form 990.”](https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/592193032/202101319349303525/full) 2020.

[^71]:
    [“Former Alabama Organ Center Executive Sentenced for Fraud.”](https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/birmingham/press-releases/2012/former-alabama-organ-center-executive-sentenced-for-fraud)
    FBI Press Release, 2012.

[^72]:
    [“Whistleblower threatened with being cremated alive after exposing mortuary kickback scheme.”](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/whistleblower-threatened-with-being-cremated-alive-after-exposing-mortuary-kickback-scheme/)
    CBS News, 2019.

[^73]:
    [“The Seamy Side Of The Human Tissue Business.”](https://www.npr.org/2012/07/19/156988089/the-seamy-side-of-the-human-tissue-business)
    NPR, 2012.

[^74]:
    [A System in Need of Repair: Addressing Organizational Failures of the U.S.’s Organ Procurement and Transplant Network.”](<https://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/UNOS%20Hearing%20Confidential%20Memo%20(FOR%20RELEASE).pdf>)
    United States Senate, 2022.

[^75]:
    [A System in Need of Repair: Addressing Organizational Failures of the U.S.’s Organ Procurement and Transplant Network.”](<https://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/UNOS%20Hearing%20Confidential%20Memo%20(FOR%20RELEASE).pdf>)
    United States Senate, 2022.

[^76]:
    [“A System in Need of Repair: Addressing Organizational Failures of the U.S.’s Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network.”](https://www.finance.senate.gov/hearings/a-system-in-need-of-repair-addressing-organizational-failures-of-the-uss-organ-procurement-and-transplantation-network)
    United States Senate, 2022.

[^77]:
    [“Michael Mastromarino, Dentist Guilty in Organ Scheme, Dies at 49.”](https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/09/nyregion/michael-mastromarino-dentist-guilty-in-organ-scheme-dies-at-49.html)
    New York Times, 2013.

[^78]:
    [“The Seamy Side Of The Human Tissue Business.”](https://www.npr.org/2012/07/19/156988089/the-seamy-side-of-the-human-tissue-business)
    NPR, 2012.

[^79]:
    “Empires of the Flesh: Tissue and Organ Taboos.” University of Minnesota Law
    School, 2009.

[^80]:
    [“The Interplay of Socioeconomic Status, Distance to Center, and Interdonor Service Area Travel on Kidney Transplant Access and Outcomes.”](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2994090/)
    _Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology_, 2010.

[^81]:
    [“Inequity in Organ Donation.”](https://bloomworks.digital/organdonationreform/Inequity/)
    Bloomworks, 2020.

[^82]:
    [“The socioeconomic status of donors and recipients living unrelated renal transplants in the United States.”](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22425125/)
    _Journal of Urology_, 2012.

[^83]:
    [“Twenty years of evolving trends in racial disparities for adult kidney transplant recipients.”](<https://www.kidney-international.org/article/S0085-2538(16)30323-4/fulltext>)
    _Kidney International_, 2016.

[^84]:
    [“Racial Disparities in Access to Renal Transplantation - Clinically Appropriate or Due to Underuse or Overuse?”](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM200011233432106)
    _New England Journal of Medicine_, 2000.

[^85]:
    [“Cost of Outpatient Arthroscopic Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction Among Commercially Insured Patients in the United States, 2005-2013.”](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5302102/)
    _Orthopedic Journal of Sports Medicine_, 2017.

[^86]:
    [“Arthroscopy, knee, surgical; with meniscus repair (medial or lateral).”](https://www.medicare.gov/procedure-price-lookup/cost/29882/)
    Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, 2022.

[^87]:
    “Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2020 - May 2021.” The Federal
    Reserve, 2022.

[^88]:
    [“Regional Variation in Private Dental Coverage and Care Among Dentate Adults Aged 18–64 in the United States, 2014–2017.”](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db336.htm#:~:text=Nationally%2C%2050.2%25%20of%20dentate%20adults,to%2057.1%25%20in%20New%20England)
    Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, 2019.

[^89]:
    [“Disparities in Oral Health.”](https://www.cdc.gov/oralhealth/oral_health_disparities/index.htm)
    Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, 2021.

[^90]:
    [“Human organ and tissue transplantation: Report by the Director-General.”](https://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA75/A75_41-en.pdf)
    World Health Organization, 2022.

[^91]:
    <span style="text-decoration:underline;">“Michigan family questions why
    organs were harvested before autopsy in 'unusual' death.</span>” The Detroit
    News, 2022.

[^92]:
    [“The NOTIFY Guide on Vigilance and Surveillance.”](https://www.notifylibrary.org/content/booklet-2018)
    WHO Collaborating Centre on Vigilance and Surveillance for Human Cells,
    Tissues, and Organs, 2017.

[^93]:
    [“Executive Summary of the Evaluation of the Union legislation on blood, tissues and cell.”](https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2019-10/swd_2019_375_summary_en_0.pdf)
    European Commission, 2019.

[^94]:
    [“Implementation Guide: Use of ISBT 128 by North American Tissue Banks.”](https://www.aatb.org/sites/default/files/guidance-docs/IG-028-Use-of-ISBT-128-by-North-American-Tissue-Banks-v1.4.0.pdf)
    ICCBBA, 2020.

[^95]:
    [“The 2012 and 2015 National Tissue Recovery Through Utilization Survey Report.”](https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/ntrus-report-2015.pdf)
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2015.

[^96]:
    [“Tissue Implants: Traceability of records.”](https://www.jointcommission.org/standards/standard-faqs/ambulatory/transplant-safety-ts/000001800/)
    The Joint Commission, 2022.

[^97]:
    [“IRODaT Database: Canada.”](https://www.irodat.org/?p=database&c=CA&year=2020#data)
    International Registry in Organ Donation and Transplantation, 2020.

[^98]:
    [“Eye and Tissue Donation in Australia: Monthly Report.”](https://www.anzdata.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/20220921_Eye_Tissue_Monthly_Report_2022August.pdf)
    Australia and New Zealand Eye and Tissue Donation Registry (ANZOD), 2022.

[^99]:
    “Mid-America Transplant Response to CMS-3409-NC Request for Information;
    Health and Safety Requirements for Transplant Programs, Organ Procurement
    Organizations, and End-Stage Renal Disease Facilities.” Mid-America
    Transplant, 2022.

[^100]:
    [“Transplant Safety: Key Facts.”](https://www.cdc.gov/transplantsafety/overview/key-facts.html#:~:text=In%20the%20U.S%2C%20the%20most,2.5%20million%20grafts%20are%20transplanted.)
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022.

[^101]:
    [“The US Navy Tissue Bank: 50 Years on the Cutting Edge.”](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15256965/)
    _Cell and Tissue Banking_, 2000.

[^102]:
    [“Insights into the Worldwide Tissue Banking Industry to 2026 - Opportunity Analysis for the New Entrants.”](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20200512005440/en/Insights-into-the-Worldwide-Tissue-Banking-Industry-to-2026---Opportunity-Analysis-for-the-New-Entrants---ResearchAndMarkets.com)
    BusinessWire.com, 2020.

[^103]:
    Methodology: The OPTN OPO
    <a href="https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/about/search-membership/?memberType=Organ%20Procurement%20Organizations&organType=%27AL%27&state=0&region=0">membership
    list</a> was cross-referenced against the list of
    <a href="https://www.aatb.org/accredited-bank-search">AATB-accredited</a>
    tissue banks and the FDA’s
    <a href="https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cber/CFAppsPub/tiss/Index.cfm">Human
    Cell and Tissue Establishment Registration</a> database.
